In this video, I'll show you a
slightly more complex example
where the slope of the function can be
different to different points in the function.
Let's start with an example.
You have plotted the function f(a) = a².
Let's take a look at the point a=2.
So a² or f(a) = 4.
Let's nudge a slightly to
the right, so now a=2.001.
f(a) which is a² is going to
be approximately 4.004.
It turns out that the exact value,
you call the calculator and figured
this out is actually 4.004001.
I'm just going to say
4.004 is close enough.
So what this means is that when a=2,
let's draw this on the plot.
So what we're saying is that if a=2,
then f(a) = 4 and here is the
x and y axis are not drawn to scale.
Technically, does vertical height
should be much higher than
this horizontal height so the
x and y axis are not on the same scale.
But if I now nudge a to 2.001
then f(a) becomes roughly 4.004.
So if we draw this little triangle again,
what this means is that if
I nudge a to the right by 0.001,
f(a) goes up four times as much by 0.004.
So in the language of calculus,
we say that a slope that is
the derivative of f(a) at
a=2 is 4 or to write this out
of our calculus notation,
we say that d/da of f(a) = 4 when a=2.
Now one thing about this function f(a) = a²
is that the slope is different
for different values of a.
This is different than the example
we saw on the previous slide.
So let's look at a different point.
If a=5, so instead of a=2,
and now a=5 then a²=25, so that's f(a).
If I nudge a to the right again,
it's tiny little nudge to a,
so now a=5.001 then f(a) will be
approximately 25.010.
So what we see is that by
nudging a up by .001,
f(a) goes up ten times as much.
So we have that d/da f(a) = 10 when
a=5 because f(a) goes up ten times as
much as a does when I make a
tiny little nudge to a.
So one way to see why did derivatives is
different at different points is that if you
draw that little triangle right at
different locations on this,
you'll see that the ratio of the
height of the triangle over
the width of the triangle is very
different at different points on the curve.
So here, the slope=4
when a=2, a=10, when a=5.
Now if you pull up a calculus textbook,
a calculus textbook will
tell you that d/da of f(a),
so f(a) = a²,
so that's d/da of a².
One of the formulas you find are
the calculus textbook is that this thing,
the slope of the function a²,
is equal to 2a.
Not going to prove this, but
the way you find this out is that
you open up a calculus textbook to
the table formulas and they'll tell you
that derivative of 2 of a² is 2a.
And indeed, this is consistent with
what we've worked out.
Namely, when a=2, the slope of
function to a is 2x2=4.
And when a=5 then the slope of
the function 2xa is 2x5=10.
So, if you ever pull up a calculus
textbook and you see this formula,
that the derivative of a²=2a,
all that means is that for
any given value of a,
if you nudge upward by 0.001
already your tiny little value,
you will expect f(a) to go up by 2a.
That is the slope or the derivative times
other much you had nudged
to the right the value of a.
Now one tiny little detail,
I use these approximate symbols here
and this wasn't exactly 4.004,
there's an extra .001 hanging out there.
It turns out that this extra .001,
this little thing here is because
we were nudging a to the right by 0.001,
if we're instead nudging it
to the right by
this infinitesimally small value
then this extra every term will go
away and you find that the amount that
f(a) goes out is exactly equal
to the derivative times the amount
that you nudge a to the right.
And the reason why is not 4.004 exactly is
because derivatives are defined using
this infinitesimally small nudges to a
rather than 0.001 which is not.
And while 0.001 is small,
it's not infinitesimally small.
So that's why the amount that
f(a) went up isn't exactly given
by the formula but it's only a kind of
approximately given by the derivative.
To wrap up this video,
let's just go through a
few more quick examples.
The example you've already seen
is that if f(a) = a² then
the calculus textbooks formula table will
tell you that the derivative is equal to 2a.
And so the example we went through
was it if (a) = 2,
f(a) = 4, and we nudge a,
since it's a little bit
bigger than f(a) is about
4.004 and so f(a) went up four times
as much and indeed when a=2,
the derivatives is equal to 4.
Let's look at some other examples.
Let's say, instead the f(a) = a³.
If you go to a calculus textbook
and look up the table of formulas,
you see that the slope of
this function, again,
the derivative of this function
is equal to 3a².
So you can get this formula
out of the calculus textbook.
So what this means?
So the way to interpret
this is as follows.
Let's take a=2 as an example again.
So f(a) or a³=8, that's
two to the power of three.
So we give a a tiny little nudge,
you find that f(a) is about 8.012
and feel free to check this.
Take 2.001 to the power of three,
you find this is very close to 8.012.
And indeed, when a=2 that's
3x2² does equal to 3x4,
you see that's 12.
So the derivative formula predicts that if
you nudge a to the right by tiny little bit,
f(a) should go up 12 times as much.
And indeed, this is true
when a went up by .001,
f(a) went up 12 times as much by .012.
Just one last example
and then we'll wrap up.
Let's say that f(a) is equal to
the log function.
So on the right log of a,
I'm going to use this as
the base e logarithm.
So some people write that as log(a).
So if you go to calculus textbook,
you find that when you take the
derivative of log(a).
So this is a function that
just looks like that,
the slope of this function is
given by 1/a.
So the way to interpret this is that
if a has any value then let's just keep
using a=2 as an example and you
nudge a to the right by .001,
you would expect f(a) to go up by
1/a that is by the derivative times
the amount that you increase a.
So in fact, if you pull up a calculator,
you find that if a=2,
f(a) is about 0.69315 and if you
increase f and if you increase a to
2.001 then f(a) is about 0.69365,
this has gone up by 0.0005.
And indeed, if you look at the formula
for the derivative when a=2,
d/da f(a) = 1/2.
So this derivative formula predicts
that if you pump up a by .001,
you would expect f(a) to go up by
only 1/2 as much and 1/2 of .001
is 0.0005 which is exactly what we got.
Then when a goes up by .001,
going from a=2 to
a=2.001, f(a) goes up by half as much.
So, the answers are going up by
approximately .0005.
So if we draw that little triangle
if you will is that if on
the horizontal axis just goes up by
.001 on the vertical axis,
log(a) goes up by half of that so .0005.
And so that 1/a or 1/2 in this case,
1a=2 that's just the slope of
this line when a=2.
So that's it for derivatives.
There are just two take home messages
from this video.
First is that the derivative of the
function just means the slope of
a function and the slope of a function
can be different at different
points on the function.
In our first example where
f(a) = 3a those a straight line.
The derivative was the same everywhere,
it was three everywhere.
For other functions like
f(a) = a² or f(a) = log(a),
the slope of the line varies.
So, the slope or the derivative can be
different at different points on the curve.
So that's a first take away.
Derivative just means slope of a line.
Second takeaway is that if you want to
look up the derivative of a function,
you can flip open your calculus textbook
or look up Wikipedia and
often get a formula for the slope of
these functions at different points.
So that, I hope you have an intuitive
understanding of derivatives or slopes of lines.
Let's go into the next video.
We'll start to talk about the
computation graph and how to
use that to compute derivatives of
more complex functions.